Executable documents

From talks, to papers, to books:

Joe is giving a lab meeting talk. He prepares presentation "slides" as IPython Notebooks, interleaving narrative text, images, LaTeX formulae, and code.  

He prepares code cells to load up some data and perform some  analysis.  Joe can execute the code cells, getting the results in-line in the same environment that he's writing the rest of the talk materials.

The first code cell loads the data, which he'll only need to execute once. Another code cell which perform some analysis, which is followed by a narrative cells that describes the method used, provides a rendered formula for the code implementation, suggests how some parameters might by altered, and provides clickable links to the paper which first introduced the technique. This is followed by yet another cell to plot a subset of the data, so he can tweak the plotting parameters, such as line width and line color and re-execute again until getting a desirable result.

The IPython Notebook allows anyone to turn the analysis portion of computationally driven talks into a social activity. The discussion generated by the talk leads Joe and his advisor to expand the work into a full manuscript, with the notebook as the computational companion of the paper.

This practice has already been further extended to the scale of whole books: 

Python for Signal Processing by Jose Unpingco (Springer)
Mining The Social Web (2nd ed.) by Matthew A Russell (O'Reilly) 

Mining the Social Web cover link:
http://akamaicovers.oreilly.com/images/0636920030195/lrg.jpg

